@need 3200

@node Asynchronous Events
@chapter Asynchronous Events

A process may be called upon to respond to events which occur
asynchronously with respect to all other activities of the process.
Unix signals are an example: a signal may be delivered to a process
at any time.


Systas Scheme is made of up several subsystems such as the
interpreter, the built-in functions, and the garbage collector that
can not interrupt one another arbitrarily.  For example, during
portions of garbage collection, primitive functions can not be
called.  During some portions of the built-ins, neither the garbage
collector or the evaluator can be called.  These restrictions raise
the question of just how asynchronous events are handled.  If an
asynchronous event arrives while a built-in function is busy, then
it is not safe to call the interpreter to handle the asynchronous
event.  Scheme programs may define additional conditions, such as
when making updates to a complex data structure, during which
asynchronous event handling should be deferred.


A data-type called an @geindex async object
@dfn{async object} helps to reconcile this
situation.  An async object represents a particular kind of
asynchronous event.  Every async object corresponds to a procedure,
the @geindex async handler
@dfn{async handler}, that will be called whenever that asynchronous
event has occured.  When the event occurs, the async object is
specially marked.  The mark instructs the system to call the async
later, when it is safe.  In other words, async objects provide
programmers with a way to schedule a call to a handler procedure
without necessarily making that call immediately.


Calls to async handlers are never nested.  While one is running, no
other handler will be called.  If an async is already marked,
marking it again has no further effect.


There are two flavors of async objects, @geindex system asyncs
@dfn{system asyncs} and @geindex user
asyncs
@dfn{user
asyncs}.  Handlers for system asyncs are called by the interpreter
as soon as it is safe to do so and take precedence over ordinary
evaluation Handlers for user asyncs are called only when explicitly
requested by a running program.


To prevent all system asyncs from running, use the procedure
@code{mask-interrupts}.  To permit system asyncs to run after masking
them, use @code{unmask-interrupts}.

@menu
* Signal Handlers::
* Rationale -- Asynchronous Events::
@end menu

@need 3200

@node Signal Handlers
@section Signal Handlers

There is a system async for every kind of unix signal known to the
interpreter.  When a signal arrives, the corresponding async is
marked.


By default, the async functions for signals throw an exception of
type @code{signal}: For example:

@example
@group
     (throw 'signal 'SIGINT) // This happens when SIGINT arrives
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

You can override the default behavior by defining a function named
after the signal (with a lowercase name).  For example:

@example
@group
     (define (sigint) (display "sigint happens\n"))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

There are two @geindex pseudo-signals
@dfn{pseudo-signals} -- these work like unix signals but
are generated internally and do not correspond to any actual unix
signals.  These are:

@example
@group
     SIGGC           ;; Signalled when garbage collection finishes
     SIGTICK         ;; Signalled when the tick counter expires.
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

The @geindex tick counter
@dfn{tick counter} is a count-down timer that is decremented
@geindex frequently
@dfn{frequently} by the interpreter.  To set the tick counter, use the
function @code{set-tick-rate}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{async}@fuindex async
@*
@example
@group
(async thunk)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Construct a new async object that calls @code{thunk} when executed.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{system-async}@fuindex system-async
@*
@example
@group
(system-async thunk)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Construct a new system async that calls @code{thunk} when ready to be
executed.  System asyncs are automatically invoked as soon after
being marked as possible, if they are marked using
@code{system-async-mark}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{async-mark}@fuindex async-mark
@*
@example
@group
(async-mark async)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Mark @code{async} ready for execution.  

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{system-async-mark}@fuindex system-async-mark
@*
@example
@group
(system-async-mark async)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Mark an @code{async} ready for execution and execute all pending system
asyncs as quickly as possible.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{set-tick-rate}@fuindex set-tick-rate
@*
@example
@group
(set-tick-rate n)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

The @code{tick} timer is decremented frequently during the evaluation of
expressions.  When it reaches @code{0}, a @geindex tick signal
@dfn{tick signal} is generated which
causes the procedure bound to @geindex TICK_SIGNAL
@dfn{TICK_SIGNAL} to be invoked.


This procedure sets the tick timer to @code{n} -- @code{n} ticks must occur
before a tick signal is generated.  If @code{n} is @code{0}, no tick signals
are generated.


The previous value of the tick timer is returned.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{run-asyncs}@fuindex run-asyncs
@*
@example
@group
(run-asyncs list-of-asyncs)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Execute the thunks associated with any marked asyncs in
@code{list-of-asyncs}.  Clear the marks of those asyncs.  If interrupts
are currently masked, return without doing anything.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{mask-interrupts}@fuindex mask-interrupts
@*
@example
@group
(mask-interrupts)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Block the execution of asyncs by incrementing the interrupt mask
counter.  See @code{unmask-interrupts}.


Return the old value of the interrupt mask counter (an integer).

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{unmask-interrupts}@fuindex unmask-interrupts
@*
@example
@group
(unmask-interrupts)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Decrement the interrupt mask variable if it is greater than @code{0}.
When the interrupt mask variable is @code{0}, interrupts are permitted.


Return the old value of the interrupt mask counter (an integer).

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{without-interrupts}@fuindex without-interrupts
@*
@example
@group
(without-interrupts thunk)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Simply:

@example
@group
 (dynamic-wind mask-interrupts
               thunk
               unmask-interrupts))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{with-interrupts}@fuindex with-interrupts
@*
@example
@group
(with-interrupts thunk)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Conceptually, this is approximately:

@example
@group
 (dynamic-wind unmask-interrupts
               thunk
               mask-interrupts))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

@noindent
but in fact, things are not that simple:

@example
@group
      ;; We can't write:
      ;;
      ;;     (dynamic-wind unmask-interrupts thunk mask-interrupts)
      ;;
      ;; because `unmask-interrupts' can be exited by a exception 
@end group
@group
      ;; thrown from an interrupt handler.  That would cause
      ;; `with-interrupts' to exit with interrupts unmasked.
      ;; 
      (dynamic-wind (lambda () #f)
@end group
@group
                    (lambda ()
                      (dynamic-wind unmask-interrupts
                                    thunk
                                    (lambda () #f)))
                    mask-interrupts)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{interrupts-masked?}@fuindex interrupts-masked?
@*
@example
@group
(interrupts-masked?)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return @code{#t} if interrupts are currently blocked, @code{#f} otherwise.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{ignore-signals}@fuindex ignore-signals
@*
@example
@group
(ignore-signals)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Restore the default handlers for all unix signals handled by the
Scheme.


This is intended for use after @code{fork()} and before @code{exec()}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{unignore-signals}@fuindex unignore-signals
@*
@example
@group
(unignore-signals)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Restore the Scheme handlers for unix signals.


This undoes the effect of @code{ignore-signals}.




@need 3200

@node Rationale -- Asynchronous Events
@section Rationale -- Asynchronous Events

Systas need asyncs for Posix signals, but their is a natural abstraction
to Posix signals, which I hope I've captured with this interface.







