@need 3200

@node Evaluation
@chapter Evaluation

@geindex Source forms
@dfn{Source forms} are list structures which obey the rules of Systas
Scheme syntax.


@geindex Evaluation
@dfn{Evaluation} is the operation by which source forms are interpreted
by the system to make a series of calls to primitive functions.


Evaluation has the job of resolving variable references, interpreting
special forms, and carrying out function calls.   This section
describes the interface to those capabilities.


An introduction to Scheme or the current @geindex Revised Report on Scheme
@dfn{Revised Report on Scheme}
would be a good place to read about evaluation in more detail.  This
overview is intended just as an informal reference.

@menu
* Understanding How Evaluation Works in Systas Scheme::
* Specifying Top-Level Environments for Evaluation::
* Eval-Related Procedures::
* Support for Debugging::
* Debugging-Related Procedures::
* Rationale -- Evaluation::
@end menu

@need 3200

@node Understanding How Evaluation Works in Systas Scheme
@section Understanding How Evaluation Works in Systas Scheme

When an expression is read for evaluation, the result is an
ordinary structure of lists, symbols and other objects.  Evaluation
begins by making a copy of the list and structure of the expression
and the copy is then interpreted directly.  The source form is
copied for two reasons.  First, so that if the original source form
is later modified, the modifications have no effect on evaluation.
Second, so that the evaluator is free to modify the copy without
effecting the original source form.  It is possible to write
self-modifying code in Systas Scheme (by using low-level macros),
but not by modifying the source forms passed to the evaluator.


As evaluation proceeds, the copied source form is modified by the
evaluator.  Calls to macros are replaced by their expansion and
variable names (symbols) are replaced by absolute or relative
pointers to the variables they address (absolute pointers for
global variables, relative pointers for local variables).  When the
same expression is evaluated more than once (for example, the
expressions in the body of a procedure), these modifications speed
up subsequent evaluations of the same source forms.


Basic Scheme syntax (@code{define}, @code{lambda}, @code{let}, @code{set!}, etc.) is
implemented by macros that expand to a kind of list-structured
virtual machine code which the evaluator can interpret rapidly.


Environments are represented as a list of lists.  The environment
is a list of frames (lexical scopes) and each frame is a list of
the variables and values of the variables in that scope.  For
example, in the body of the function:

@example
@group
     (lambda (v1 v2 . rest) . body)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

The lexical environment is:

@example
@group
     ( ;; One frame of the environment:
       ;; 
       (   (v1 v2 . rest)            ;; The variables in this frame.
           value-of-v1               ;; The values of those variables.
           value-of-v2 
        . value-of-rest)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
      ;; Frames for the enclosing scopes.
      ;;
      . outer-frames-of-environment)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

The outermost frame of an environment may be a procedure instead of
a list.  In that case, the procedure is a top-level lookup function
that maps free variable names to first-class variable objects.




@need 3200

@node Specifying Top-Level Environments for Evaluation
@section Specifying Top-Level Environments for Evaluation

The procedure @code{eval2} permits programs to specify the mapping
between the names of free variables (also known as @geindex global
variables
@dfn{global
variables} and first-class variable objects.  This is done by means
of a procedure called the @geindex top-level environment mapping
@dfn{top-level environment mapping}, as in
this example:

@example
@group
  ;; tiny-top-level defines a top-level environment.
  ;; It maps variable names to the variables they 
  ;; stand for.
  ;;
  (define tiny-top-level
@end group
@group
    (let ((+-var (make-variable + '+))
          (x-var (make-variable 1 'x))
          (y-var (make-variable 2000 'y))
          (define-var (make-variable define 'define))
          (quote-var (make-variable quote 'quote))
@end group
@group
          (extras ()))
      (lambda (name defining?)
        (case name
          ((+)       +-var)
          ((x)       x-var)
@end group
@group
          ((y)       y-var)
          ((define)  define-var)
          ((quote)   quote-var)
          (else      (or (assq-ref extras name)
                         (if (not defining?)
@end group
@group
                             (error "undefined variable" name)
                             (begin
                               (set! extras
@end group
@group
                                     (cons
                                       (cons name
                                             (make-variable name #f))
                                           extras))
                               (assq-ref extras name)))))))))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
  (eval2 '(+ x y) tiny-top-level) 
  => 2001
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
  (eval2 'q tiny-top-level)
  ;;; ERROR: undefined variable q
  ;;; ABORT
  ;;;
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
  (eval2 '(define q 420) tiny-top-level)
  => ()
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
  (eval2 'q tiny-top-level)
  => 420
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

It is important to understand that the environment function passed
to @code{eval2} is not called every time a particular global variable
reference is evaluated.  Within a closure, each global variable
reference is normally resolved at most once, the first time it is
evaluated.  At that time, the resolution is cached.  If the same
variable reference is evaluated in the future, the costly lookup
using an environment function is avoided.  (See @ref{Understanding How Evaluation Works in Systas Scheme}.)


This can lead to some behaviors that might seem odd at first:

@example
@group
     ;; Create two variables with the same name, but
     ;; different values:
     ;;
     (define var1 (make-variable 'var1-value 'xyzzy))
     (define var2 (make-variable 'var2-value 'xyzzy))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     (define the-var var1)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     ;; This trivial env-fn maps all "xyzzy" to
     ;; whichever variable is bound to the-var:
     ;;
     (define (an-env-fn name define?)
       (if (eq? name 'xyzzy)
           the-var
           ;; otherwise, use the normal binding:
           ;;
           (module-variable (current-module) name)))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     ;; Use eval2 to capture that env-fn in some closures:
     ;;
     (define sample-fn (eval2 '(lambda () xyzzy) an-env-fn))
     (define sample-fn2 (eval2 '(lambda () xyzzy) an-env-fn))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     ;; Evaluating the resulting function resolves xyzzy to var1,
     ;; and caches that result:
     ;;
     (sample-fn)
     => 'var1-value
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     ;; Even if `the-var' is changed, since `sample-fn' has
     ;; executed at least once, var1 is still used:
     ;;
     (set! the-var var2)
     (sample-fn)
     => 'var1-value
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
     ;; On the other hand, sample-fn2 has never been executed.
     ;; If it is run now, xyzzy will be looked up and resolved to
     ;; var2:
     ;;
     (sample-fn2)
     => 'var2-value
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

You can flush the cache for any particular variable name using this
function @code{unhash-names}:

@example
@group
     (unhash-names '(xyzzy))
     (sample-fn)
     => 'var2-value
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example



@need 3200

@node Eval-Related Procedures
@section Eval-Related Procedures
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{denoted-variable}@fuindex denoted-variable
@*
@example
@group
(denoted-variable name env)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return the first-class variable denoted by @code{name} in the
environment @code{env}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{eval}@fuindex eval
@*
@example
@group
(eval exp)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Evaluate @code{exp} at the top-level.


The list structure of @code{exp} is copied before it is evaluated.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{eval2}@fuindex eval2
@*
@example
@group
(eval2 exp proc)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Evaluate @code{exp} at the top-level.  Free variables are 
resolved by calling @code{proc} with two arguments:

@example
@group
     (proc variable-name define?)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

@code{variable-name} is a symbol whose name is the name of the
free variable.


@code{define?} is @code{#t} if the variable is being defined by @code{define} or
something equivalent.  


If @code{define?} is @code{#f}, and there is no binding for @code{variable-name},
then @code{proc} should return @code{#f}.  Otherwise (if there is a binding
of if @code{define?} is not @code{#f}) then @code{proc} should return a variable
object. (*Note: First-Class Variables.)


The list structure of @code{exp} is copied before it is evaluated.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{eval-environment!}@fuindex eval-environment!
@*
@example
@group
(eval-environment! expression environment)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Evaluate @code{expression} in @code{environment}.  The evaluator may modify
@code{expression}.




@need 3200

@node Support for Debugging
@section Support for Debugging

@strong{WARNING:} This code hasn't been touched in a long time and is
probably somewhat broken.


The evaluator provides low-level support for debugging Scheme
programs.  The evalutator can single-step through expressions
allowing Scheme programs to examine what is being evaluated, skip
chosen subexpressions, catch errors in chosen subexpressions, and
override the return value of already evaluated expressions.  At any
time the evaluator can produce a backtrace that describes what
expressions are currently being evaluated.


The procedure @code{call-stepping} is used to enter the evaluator in
single-step mode.  While in single step mode, the evaluator pauses
before each subexpression and calls the (user-definable) procedure
@code{step-break} with no arguments.  If @code{step-break} returns a cons
pair, evaluation of that subexpression is skipped and the value in
the car of that pair is used as the value of the subexpression.




@need 3200

@node Debugging-Related Procedures
@section Debugging-Related Procedures
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{call-stepping}@fuindex call-stepping
@*
@example
@group
(call-stepping thunk)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Invoke @code{thunk} in single-step mode. 

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{raw-backtrace}@fuindex raw-backtrace
@*
@example
@group
(raw-backtrace)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return the current bactkrace information. 

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{set-stepbrk-flag}@fuindex set-stepbrk-flag
@*
@example
@group
(set-stepbrk-flag frame-id value)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Set the @geindex stepbrk-flag
@dfn{stepbrk-flag} for a particular backtrace frame.  

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{set-retbrk-flag}@fuindex set-retbrk-flag
@*
@example
@group
(set-retbrk-flag frame-id value)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Set the @geindex retbrk-flag
@dfn{retbrk-flag} for a particular backtrace frame.  (*Note:
Support for Debugging.)




@need 3200

@node Rationale -- Evaluation
@section Rationale -- Evaluation

One of the design goals of Systas is:


@strong{Interactive Use} Systas should include whatever features are
desirable for @emph{interactive use}.  In particular, it should be a
pleasant experience to extend, modify, and examine a Systas
application @emph{as it is running.}


Thus, @code{eval} is needed.   


@code{eval2} provides everything needed to implement most module systems
I can think of.


@code{eval-environment} is strictly experimental.


There is no rationale for the debugging procedures -- some design
work is needed.







