@need 3200

@node Introducing Systas Scheme
@chapter Introducing Systas Scheme

Systas Scheme is a dialect of the Scheme programming language.
Currently, the Systas Scheme dialect is understood by a single 
interpreter, called, @code{systas}.


Systas Scheme (the language) has several design goals.  These include:


@strong{Beefed up Scheme} Systas is close to the minimal language defined by
the RnRS series of documents (espcially R4RS), but adds some features
for both power and convenience.  Systas is supposed to close the gap
between the "toy" language, Standard Scheme, and a serious,
practical language.  For that purpose, Systas includes a module
system, some new data types, and an enriched collection of primitives.
Systas is distributed with a powerful library of special purpose
modules.


@strong{Interactive Use} Systas should include whatever features are
desirable for @emph{interactive use}.  In particular, it should be a
pleasant experience to extend, modify, and examine a Systas
application @emph{as it is running.}


@strong{Scheme for Posix} Systas comes with a nearly complete programming
interface to the basic capabilities of Posix environments.  Systas
includes a flexible and efficient file system interface and a
shell module for managing subprocesses in sophisticated ways.


@strong{Scheme for Text Processing} The Systas string types have features
in support of convenient and efficient text processing.


@strong{Scheme for Numeric Processing} The Systas number types will have
features in support of convenient and efficient numeric processing,
including an extensible form the full numeric lattice of standard
Scheme.


@strong{Scheme as an Extension Language} Eventually, Systas will be used as
an extension language.  The primary goal is to build a generic
interaction manager, similar in style to Emacs, but including
facilities for a greater range of graphical input and output.
Imagine an emacs-like program with the display capabilities of 
modern web browsers...




