@need 3200

@node Weak Vectors and Weak Hash Tables
@chapter Weak Vectors and Weak Hash Tables

Normally, if object A references object B, then object B is
guaranteed to exist for as long as A does.  @geindex Weak references
@dfn{Weak references} are
the exception to that rule.


An object A may weakly reference an object B, in which case B might
cease to exist before A does.  If that happens, A's reference to B
is removed.  The rule is that when all the references to an object
are weak references, the system is free (but not obligated) to
destroy the object and remove the references at any time.  If any
reference to an object is not a weak reference (including the
implicit reference of using the object as an anonymous intermediate
value of a complex expression), then the object is protected and
all references to the object, including weak references, will
continue to exist.


There are several types in Systas that hold weak references to
other objects.  These types are all vector-like objects - @code{vector?}
returns true if passed one of these objects.


A @geindex weak-vector
@dfn{weak-vector} is like a vector, except that the elements of the
vector are weakly referenced.  When a reference is removed from a
weak vector, that element is replaced by @code{()}.


A @geindex weak-key-hash-table
@dfn{weak-key-hash-table} is like a vector, except that if any elements
of the vector are assoc lists, then the @emph{keys} (cars of key-value
cells) of those lists are weakly referenced.  When a key is removed
from such an assoc list because the object it refers to has been
destroyed, the key-value cell for that key is deleted from the
assoc list.


A @geindex weak-value-hash-table
@dfn{weak-value-hash-table} is like a vector, except that if any
elements of the vector are assoc lists, then the @emph{values} (cdrs of
key-value cells) of those lists are weakly referenced.  When a value is
removed from such an assoc list because the object it refers to has
been destroyed, the key-value cell for that value is deleted
from the assoc list.


A @geindex doubly-weak-hash-table
@dfn{doubly-weak-hash-table} is like a vector, except that if any
elements of the vector are assoc lists, then both the @emph{keys} and
@emph{values} (cars and cdrs of key-value cells) of those lists are
weakly referenced.  When a key or value is removed from such an assoc
list because the object it refers to has been destroyed, the 
key-value cell for that value is deleted from the assoc list.


The printed representations of these objects are:

@example
@group
     #w( elts... )           ; a weak hash table.
     #wv( elts... )          ; a weak value hash table.
     #wk( elts... )          ; a weak key hash table.
     #wkv( elts... )         ; a doubly weak hash table.
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{weak-vector?}@fuindex weak-vector?
@*
@example
@group
(weak-vector? obj)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return @code{#t} if @code{obj} is a weak vector, @code{#f} otherwise.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{weak-key-hash-table?}@fuindex weak-key-hash-table?
@*
@example
@group
(weak-key-hash-table? obj)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return @code{#t} if @code{obj} is a weak key hash table, @code{#f} otherwise.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{weak-value-hash-table?}@fuindex weak-value-hash-table?
@*
@example
@group
(weak-value-hash-table? obj)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return @code{#t} if @code{obj} is a weak value hash table, @code{#f} otherwise.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{doubly-weak-hash-table?}@fuindex doubly-weak-hash-table?
@*
@example
@group
(doubly-weak-hash-table? obj)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Return @code{#t} if @code{obj} is a doubly weak hash table, @code{#f} otherwise.

@need 3200

@section Constructing Weak Vectors
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{make-weak-vector}@fuindex make-weak-vector
@*
@example
@group
(make-weak-vector n :optional fill multiple?)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Create a new weak vector of @code{n} elements, initialized to @code{fill} or
@code{()} if @code{fill} is not specified.


If @code{multiple?} is supplied and not @code{#f}, then @code{fill} is interpreted
as a list of initializers.  If there are too few elements in that
list, the remaining elements are initialized to @code{()}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{weak-vector}@fuindex weak-vector
@*
@example
@group
(weak-vector . elts)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Construct a new weak vector containing @code{elts}.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{list->weak-vector}@fuindex list->weak-vector
@*
@example
@group
(list->weak-vector elts)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Construct a new weak vector containing the members of the list
@code{elts}.




@need 3200

@section Constructing Weak Hash Tables
@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{make-weak-key-hash-table}@fuindex make-weak-key-hash-table
@*
@example
@group
(make-weak-key-hash-table n)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Create a weak key hash table with @code{n} buckets.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{make-weak-value-hash-table}@fuindex make-weak-value-hash-table
@*
@example
@group
(make-weak-value-hash-table n)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Create a weak value hash table with @code{n} buckets.

@sp 1
@need 1750
@noindent
@b{* Function} @code{make-doubly-weak-hash-table}@fuindex make-doubly-weak-hash-table
@*
@example
@group
(make-doubly-weak-hash-table n)
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Create a doubly weak hash table with @code{n} buckets.




@need 3200

@section Rationale -- Weak References

Weak references were included to support a style of programming
with memoization that is not possible without them.


Memoization, weak-references, and garbage collection interact
nicely: a function can be memoized in a weak hash table without
leaking storage.  The memo retains only live values.  If only a few
values would otherwise live, programmers can augment a weak hash
table with a bounded-size queue of recently memoized values to
extend the lifetime of a limited number of memoized values.


Without weak refrences, or something equivalent, a memo must either
grow without bound, or fail to promise @code{eq?} results for @code{eq?}
arguments.  Consider whether it is possible to implement the
following without weak references of some kind and without leaking
storage:

@example
@group
             (define memo (make-doubly-weak-hash-table 509))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example
@example
@group
             ;; This version of cons always returns 
             ;; an eq? pair for eq? objects except that
             ;; the pairs it creates may be garbage
             ;; collected if they are not otherwise 
             ;; referenced.
@end group
@group
             ;;
             (define (cached-cons a b)
                (let ((prototype (cons a b)))
                   (or (hash-ref memo prototype)
                       (hash-set! memo prototype))))
@end group
@group
@end group
@end example

Other systems provide @geindex weak pointers
@dfn{weak pointers} which is conceptually a more
general facility (though there is no actual difference in
capability).


Weak vectors and hash tables were provided in Systas to @geindex optimize
the common case
@dfn{optimize
the common case} (our most favored uses for weak references) and
because they happened to be easy to implement.  Had we implemented
weak pointers and tried to build hash tables from those, the result
would probably have been much less efficient and less convenient.


Weak pointers may be provided later, if a need for them is
demonstrated.







